
Filename: xxx-tokenbucket.txt
Title: Token Bucket
Author: Florian Tschorsch and Björn Scheuermann
Created: 03-Dec-2010
Status: Draft / Open

Overview:

  The following proposal targets the reduction of queuing times in onion
  routers. In particular, we focus on the token bucket algorithm in Tor and
  point out that current usage unnecessarily locks cells for long time spans.
  We propose a non-intrusive change in Tor's design which overcomes the
  deficiencies.

Motivation and Background:

  Cell statistics from the Tor network [1] reveal that cells reside in
  individual onion routers' cell queues for up to several seconds. These
  queuing times increase the end-to-end delay very significantly and are
  apparently the largest contributor to overall cell latency in Tor.

  In Tor there exist multiple token buckets on different logical levels. They
  all work independently. They are used to limit the up- and downstream of an
  onion router. All token buckets are refilled every second with a constant
  amount of tokens that depends on the configured bandwidth limits. For
  example, the so-called RelayedTokenBucket limits relay traffic only. All
  read data of incoming connections are bound to a dedicated read token
  bucket. An analogous mechanism exists for written data leaving the onion
  router. We were able to identify the specific usage and implementation of
  the token bucket algorithm as one cause for very high (and unnecessary)
  queuing times in an onion router.

  First, we observe that the token buckets in Tor are (surprisingly at a first
  glance) allowed to take on negative fill levels. This is justified by the
  TLS connections between onion routers where whole TLS records need to be
  processed. The token bucket on the incoming side (i.e., the one which
  determines at which rate it is allowed to read from incoming TCP
  connections) in particular often runs into non-negligible negative fill
  levels. As a consequence of this behavior, sometimes slightly more data is
  read than it would be admissible upon strict interpretation of the token
  bucket concept.

  However, the token bucket for limiting the outgoing rate does not take on
  negative fill levels equally often. Consequently, it regularly happens
  that somewhat more data are read on the incoming side than the outgoing
  token bucket allows to be written during the same cycle, even if their
  configured data rates are the same. The respective cells will thus not be
  allowed to leave the onion router immediately. They will thus necessarily
  be queued for at least as long as it takes until the token bucket on the
  outgoing side is refilled again. The refill interval currently is, as
  mentioned before, one second -- so, these cells are delayed for a very
  substantial time. In summary, one could say that the two buckets, on the
  incoming and outgoing side, work like a double door system and frequently
  lock cells for a full token bucket refill interval length.

  Apart from the above described effects, it should be noted that the very
  coarse-grained refill interval of one second also has other detrimental
  effects. First, consider an onion router with multiple TLS connections over
  which cells arrive. If there is high activity (i.e., many incoming cells in
  total), then the coarse refill interval will cause unfairness. Assume (just
  for simplicity) that C doesn't share its TLS connection with any other
  circuit. Moreover, assume that C hasn't transmitted any data for some time
  (e.g., due a typical bursty HTTP traffic pattern). Consequently, there are
  no cells from this circuit in the incoming socket buffers. When the buckets
  are refilled, the incoming token bucket will immediately spend all its
  tokens on other incoming connections. Now assume that cells from C arrive
  soon after. For fairness' sake, these cells should be serviced timely --
  circuit C hasn't received any bandwidth for a significant time before.
  However, it will take a very long time (one refill interval) before the
  current implementation will fetch these cells from the incoming TLS
  connection, because the token bucket will remain empty for a long time. Just
  because the cells happened to arrive at the "wrong" point in time, they must
  wait. Such situations may occur even though the configured admissible
  incoming data rate is not exceeded by incoming cells: the long refill
  intervals often lead to an operational state where all the cells that were
  admissible during a given one-second period are queued until the end of this
  second, before the onion router even just starts processing them. This
  results in unnecessary, long queueing delays in the incoming socket buffers.
  These delays are in *addition* to the above discussed queueing delays in the
  circuit buffers. Because they occur in a different buffer, the socket buffer
  queueing times are not visible in the Tor circuit queue delay statistics [1].

  Finally, the coarse-grained refill intervals result in a very bursty outgoing
  traffic pattern at the onion routers (one large chunk of data once per
  second, instead of smooth transmission progress). This is undesirable, since
  such a traffic pattern can interfere with TCP's control mechanisms and can
  be the source of suboptimal TCP performance on the TLS links between onion
  routers.

Design:

  In order to overcome the described problems, we propose two changes related
  to the token bucket algorithm.

  First, we observe that the token bucket for the relayed traffic on the
  outgoing connections is unnecessary: since no new such traffic is generated
  in an onion router, the rate of this traffic is already limited by the read
  bucket on the incoming side (cp. RelayedTokenBucket). We therefore propose
  to remove the rate limiting mechanism on the outgoing side. This will
  eliminate the "double door effect" discussed above, since all cells are
  allowed to flow freely out of the router once they passed the incoming rate
  limiter.

  Second, the refill interval of the buckets should be shortened. The
  remaining token buckets should be refilled more often, with a
  correspondingly smaller amount of tokens. For instance, the buckets might
  be refilled every 10 milliseconds with one-hundredth of the amount of data
  admissible per second. This will help to overcome the problem of unfairness
  when reading from the incoming socket buffers. At the same time it smoothes
  the traffic leaving the onion routers. We are aware that this latter change
  has apparently been discussed before [2]; we are not sure why this change
  has not been implemented yet.

Conclusion:

  The proposed measures are very simple to implement, but nevertheless a
  significant reduction of cell queueing times can be expected. Experiments
  which we performed with a patched onion router software revealed that
  the CPU utilization of an onion router is not significantly
  impacted by the reduction of the refill interval length and that cell
  queueing times are indeed significantly shorter.

  The presented design proposal is minimally intrusive and does not
  fundamentally change the current Tor design. It is therefore highly
  migratable into the existing architecture. Onion routers can be updated
  independently. As more onion routers use a changed version, gradual
  performance improvements can be expected. We believe that our contribution
  can improve Tor's performance substantially.

  Feedback is highly appreciated.

References:

  [1] Karsten Loesing. Analysis of Circuit Queues in Tor. August 25, 2009.
  [2] https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/sponsors/SponsorD/June2011